# predict time-to-failure



Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 Available online 28 January 2024 0951-8320/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). A neural network approach to predict the time-to-failure of atmospheric  tanks exposed to external fire  Nicola Tamascelli a,b , Giordano Emrys Scarponi a , Md Tanjin Amin c , Zaman Sajid c ,  Nicola Paltrinieri b , Faisal Khan c , Valerio Cozzani a,*  a LISES – Laboratory of Industrial Safety and Environmental Sustainability, DICAM - Department of Civil, Chemical, Environmental and Materials Engineering, University  of Bologna, via Terracini n.28, 40131 Bologna, Italy  b Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, NTNU, Trondheim, Norway  c Mary Kay O’Connor Process Safety Center, Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3122, USA    ARTICLE INFO   Keywords:  Domino effect  Time-to-failure  Escalation  Cascading events  Fire  Artificial intelligence  Neural networks 

## ABSTRACT

   Domino scenarios triggered by fire pose severe risks to workers, assets, and the environment. Accurate quanti- tative models are needed to support mitigation actions addressing the prevention of fire escalation, especially  considering sensitive targets such as atmospheric tanks containing large quantities of dangerous substances. A  novel approach based on neural networks was developed, allowing the accurate quantification of the time-to-  failure (TTF) of atmospheric tanks exposed to external fires accounting for mitigation actions. Data from a  lumped parameter model were used to train and assess neural networks’ performance. The toolbox of models  obtained provides the TTF of atmospheric tanks both in the case of unmitigated fire scenarios and considering  safety barriers and protection measures, such as water deluges and fire monitors. Model predictions are fast,  accurate, and supplemented with confidence intervals. The comparative analysis demonstrated the better per- formance of the model developed compared to simplified correlations widely used in the literature to predict  TTF. The approach developed, based on the integration of neural networks in consequence analysis tools, shows  significant potential for the advancement of a quantitative assessment of domino scenarios, providing accurate  and user-friendly tools for a quick evaluation of domino fire scenarios under both mitigated and unmitigated  conditions.    1. Introduction  Fires are the most frequent type of accident in chemical facilities [1].  Fire scenarios have inherent characteristics that can jeopardize the  safety of workers and nearby residents while also causing severe eco- nomic losses [2]. In addition, fire scenarios are a frequent cause of  domino effects, triggering cascading events escalating into more severe  accidents. Some of the most severe accidents in the last two decades  indicate that  fires  play  a  leading role  in  domino scenarios [3,4].  Remarkable examples are the accident that occurred in 2007 at the  Valero refinery in Sunray, Texas, accounting for approximately $50  million in property damage and four injuries [5], the fires and explo- sions that occurred in 2009 in Jaipur, India, causing 13 deaths and more  than 200 injuries [6], and the accident that took place in 2019 in  Houston, USA, where 14 naphtha tanks burned for three days causing  property damage exceeding $150 million [7]. Domino scenarios are  described as low-probability high-impact (HILP) events and involve  chains of events triggered by an initial incident, leading to a cascading  effect with potentially severe consequences and elevating the potential  for  major  accidents [8,9].  The  risk  of  domino effects  escalates as  chemical plants  become more  concentrated and  densely packed,  emphasizing the critical importance of proactive safety measures and  risk assessments to prevent such cascading incidents [10,11].  Flammable substances are often stored in large atmospheric tanks  [2], which may contain up to 80000 m 3  of hazardous liquids. Domino  scenarios involving storage tanks are considered particularly critical due  to the quantity of the substance involved and the spatial vicinity be- tween tanks in storage facilities. For this reason, it is vital to evaluate the  response of atmospheric tanks when a fire occurs in their proximity.  When exposed to thermal loads, the tank shell is expected to undergo  substantial deformation caused by thermal stresses and internal pressure  build-up, which can lead to failure [12,13]. For these reasons, passive (e.  * Corresponding author.  E-mail address: valerio.cozzani@unibo.it (V. Cozzani).   Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Reliability Engineering and System Safety  journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ress  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2024.109974  Received 11 September 2023; Received in revised form 30 December 2023; Accepted 26 January 2024   

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 2 g., thermal insulation) and active devices (e.g., fixed water or foam  sprays and water deluge systems) that mitigate the effect of the fire [14]  are frequently implemented. The time between the start of the fire and  the possible failure of the tank, namely the time-to-failure (TTF), is thus  influenced by the design features of the tank (e.g., diameter, height, and  shell thickness), by operating parameters (e.g., filling degree, substance  density, and vapor pressure), by the fire scenario (e.g., thermal radiation  and view factor), and by the performance of passive and active safety  systems installed.  The quantification of the TTF is critical for estimating the probability  of  failure  and,  eventually, for  quantifying the  risk  associated with  escalation resulting in domino scenarios. Hence, there is a compelling  need to issue methods for the quantification of the TTF of atmospheric  tanks considering (i) fire characteristics, (ii) tank characteristics, and  (iii) safety barriers. Rigorous modelling through coupled computational  fluid dynamics (CFD) and finite element modelling (FEM) can be used to  evaluate the structural response of tanks exposed to external fire [15].  For example, Iannaccone et al. [16] and Scarponi et al. [17] used CFD  modelling to simulate the pressure and temperature profiles of LNG and  LPG pressurized tanks. Masum Jujuly et al. [18] simulated the effect of a  pool fire caused by LNG spill on multiple targets. A model for the dy- namic evaluation of the fire response of steel storage tanks integrating  CFD and FEM analysis was presented by [19]. Similar approaches were  proposed by Wang et al. [20] and Jianfeng Yang et al. [21]. However,  the expertise in setting up the simulations and the substantial compu- tational resources required to run them hinder their widespread appli- cation. In current practice, CFD and FEM simulations need substantial  data, and model validation is challenging and time-consuming within  risk assessment studies. When considered, it is usually applied only for  the deterministic analysis of single critical scenarios. To overcome this  issue, Gubinelli [22] proposed a lumped model called RADMOD to es- timate the TTF of atmospheric tanks exposed to external fires.  The  limited computational resources required to  run  RADMOD  simulations result in a significant reduction of simulation time than in  FEM simulations. However, the computational time required still makes  this approach not suitable for advanced applications, such as dynamic  risk analysis [23,24] and dynamic probabilistic risk assessment [25],  which often require the simulation of a large number of scenarios for the  quantification of accident paths. To overcome this limitation, Landucci  et  al.  [26]  used  the  results  of  RADMOD simulations to  develop a  simplified analytical correlation that  explicitly correlates the  de- pendency of the TTF on the heat load and tank volume. Recently, Yang  et al. [27] proposed an improved correlation where parameters were  fitted on results from CFD and FEM simulations.  To the best of the authors’ knowledge, the methodologies proposed  by Landucci et al. [26] and Yang et al. [27] are the only methods  currently available capable of  rapidly estimating the  TTF  of  tanks  exposed to external fire. Requiring limited computational resources is  crucial for model integration into frameworks for the dynamic risk  analysis of fire-induced scenarios – as those proposed, e.g., by [28–33] –  which all rely on the abovementioned correlations for the estimation of  the TTF. However, notwithstanding the popularity of the approach  proposed by Landucci et al. [26], the following limitations must be  acknowledged [34–36]:   •The correlations above were derived from limited datasets based on a  predefined set of tank geometries, which could restrict their gener- alization capabilities;   •The error in the TTF with respect to the original dataset values is  relatively high, especially considering scenarios with large TTFs;   •They do not provide the confidence level of predictions;   •They tend to produce over-conservative results;   •Only a single study attempted to incorporate the influence of safety  barriers into  the  simplified correlations for  the  TTF  [37],  still  suffering from the limitations listed above.  In this context, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning  (ML) present intriguing opportunities to address some of the limitations  mentioned above. In fact, advanced ML algorithms can learn directly  from failure data to develop predictive models that balance accuracy  with the use of computational results and the time required to run  simulations. In the framework of safety and reliability, the application of  ML is a relatively new yet promising area of research [38]. Recent  studies have seen a surge in research on fault detection and diagnosis  [39,40], anomaly detection [41,42], system prognosis [43,44], reli- ability analysis [45,46], and risk analysis [47]. In particular, when  considering system prognosis, numerous studies have proposed the use  of  ML  to  estimate the  Remaining Useful  Life  (RUL)  of  degrading  equipment, including lithium batteries [48], bearings (J. [49]), induc- tion motors [43], turbofans [50], wind turbines [51].  However, a significant gap is still present in the literature concerning  the application of ML for the prediction of the impact of fires on atmo- spheric tanks. Actually, recent studies have explored the use of ML  techniques to develop surrogate models based on data from Computa- tional Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and Finite Element Method (FEM) simu- lations [52,53]. For instance, Li et al. [54] applied a graph neural  network to predict the overpressure resulting from simulated Boiling  Liquid Expanding Vapor Explosions (BLEVE). Similarly, Ye and Hsu [55]  used CFD and FEM data to model 1200 fire scenarios in a steel roof  structure with fixed geometry and then employed this data to train a  Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Neural Network to predict structural  displacement. However, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, there is a  notable lack of research specifically targeting the estimation of the TTF  of atmospheric tanks exposed to external fires using ML. Only one recent  contribution, concurrent with  our  research, proposes a  ML-based  method to estimate the structural integrity of tanks under fire condi- tions [56]. Yet, this method primarily focuses on calculating failure  probability rather than directly estimating TTF, and does not consider  the effect of mitigation barriers.  The present study has developed a novel approach to bridge the  aforementioned gaps. Neural networks (NN) were used to quantify the  TTF of atmospheric tanks exposed to external fires. Simulated data from  the RADMOD model were used to build an extensive dataset containing  4896 scenarios with different tank geometries and fire characteristics.  The influence of safety barriers and safety systems is included in the  model, considering a comprehensive set of protection measures char- acterized by various activation times and effectiveness. A model toolbox  was obtained, allowing the estimation of the TTF of both unmitigated  scenarios and considering the effect of different protection measures.  Hyperparameters fine-tuning was performed to ensure optimal perfor- mance and good generalization capabilities.  Furthermore, to enhance the model output and account for predic- tion uncertainties, a model-agnostic approach was applied to estimate  confidence intervals. By this approach, the model returns a single-point  prediction for the TTF and a range of values with a specified confidence  level. This comprehensive output captures the inherent uncertainty in  the data and the model, providing a more informative and robust  assessment. The novel contributions of this study can be summarized as  follows:   •the  proposed NN-based toolbox represents an  innovative, user-  friendly, and computationally inexpensive approach for the estima- tion of the TTF of atmospheric tanks exposed to external fires;   •the approach allows for the explicit modelling of the impact of safety  barriers, enabling a detailed and accurate analysis of their effec- tiveness in various scenarios;  •the use of a comprehensive dataset encompassing various tank ge- ometries, fire characteristics, and barrier configurations improves  model robustness and generalizability;   •confidence intervals are provided to enhance model interpretability,  robustness, and credibility.  N. Tamascelli et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 3 A comparative analysis between the models developed in this study  and the simplified correlations proposed by Landucci et al. [26] and  Yang et al. [27] shows that the new models have a better performance.  The paper is organized into five sections, including this introductory  paragraph. Section 2 outlines the methodology, addressing data gener- ation and preprocessing, developing the NN models and their evalua- tion, fine-tuning hyperparameters, and generating confidence intervals.  Section 0 presents the results, showcasing the performance obtained by  the  models and  providing a  comparative analysis with  similar ap- proaches found in the literature. Results are discussed in Section 4, and 

## conclusions

 are drawn in Section 5. The models developed are included  in the Supplementary materials and are freely available for use by re- searchers ("$TTF_$$unmitigated.dill" and "$TTF_$$mitigated.dill", "$TTF_$$deluge.  dill"). Also, a quick guide ("Model Configuration and Usage.pdf") is  provided to prepare a Python environment for importing and using the  models.  2. Methodology  The methodology used to build the NN models is schematized in  Fig. 1. First, a lumped parameter model known as RADMOD [22] was  used to create two datasets (step 1 in Fig. 1): one containing failure data  related to unmitigated fire scenarios (D) and the other incorporating  the  effect  of  protective measures ( D).  These  datasets were  then  preprocessed and split into two parts (step 2 in Fig. 1). The first part (i.e.,  D train  and D train  in Fig. 1) was used to train the models, while the second  part (i.e., D eval  and D eval  in Fig. 1) was used to evaluate their prediction  performance. Subsequently, the  models’ hyperparameters were  fine-tuned through a grid-search procedure to ensure optimal perfor- mance (step 5 in Fig. 1). The resulting optimized models, namely M ∗ and  M ∗ , can be utilized to predict the TTF of unmitigated and mitigated fire  scenarios. In addition, a reference version of the model  M ∗ is offered to  account for the influence of a standard generic water deluge system,  useful in preliminary screening activities (step 6 in Fig. 1). Finally, a  procedure for  estimating confidence intervals was  implemented to  provide more informed judgments based on the confidence level asso- ciated with the predictions (step 7 in Fig. 1). A detailed description of  each step of the methodology is provided in the following.  2.1. Simulated failure data  Two series of simulations were carried out to generate failure data  for different atmospheric tanks subject to various fire conditions. The  first set of simulations focused on unmitigated scenarios, while the  second set concentrated on mitigated scenarios.  A widely used lumped parameter model, known as RADMOD [22],  was applied to simulate the behaviour of atmospheric and pressurized  tanks under fire exposure. Several studies are available in the literature  Figure 1.Flowchart of the proposed methodology. D train  and D train  indicate the training datasets that contain respectively unmitigated and mitigated fire scenarios.  Similarly, D eval  and D eval  represent unmitigated and mitigated scenarios used to evaluate the models. M ∗ and M ∗ indicate the models for the prediction of un- mitigated and mitigated TTFs.  M ∗ represents the simplified model that considers a single standard protection measure (water deluge), introduced as a case study.  N. Tamascelli et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 4 in which this lumped model is applied in the assessment of the TTF for  atmospheric tanks exposed to fire (e.g., [21,31,34,56–58]). RADMOD  partitions the computational domain into two fluid nodes (the liquid and  vapor) and two solid nodes (the liquid-wetted wall and the vapor-wetted  wall). It requires specific design (shell diameter, height, and thickness),  operational (filling level), and external (heat flux) parameters as inputs.  The outputs of the simulations are node temperatures, tank pressure  (accounting for the liquid head), axial stress, yield stress, and the  equivalent von Mises stress in the steel structure. A detailed description  of the RADMOD is reported in [22,26]. The RADMOD model thus retains  a limited computational complexity, providing results having an accu- racy comparable to that of more complex models. Even if RADMOD  shares  all  the  limitations of  lumped models, and  in  particular the  impossibility to consider liquid stratification and local temperature  gradients on the steel shell, its application to the simulation of the TTF of  large atmospheric tanks containing high boiling point liquids exposed to  external fires provides sufficiently accurate results, as shown in Fig. 2,  showing the results of the model validation against TTF results obtained  using finite element analysis (FEM).  The simulation of fire scenarios requires the definition of a set of  parameters to describe (i) the tank design and operating parameters, (ii)  the characteristics of the external fire, and (iii) the mitigation measures.  Table 1 presents a summary of these parameters, along with the corre- sponding values utilized in the simulations.  The first three parameters in Table 1 define the geometry of the tank.  Their values are taken from Table A-2a of API 650: "Welded Steel Tanks  for  Oil  Storage" [59],  which  defines the  shell-plate thickness of  typical-sized tanks for oil storage. The table includes a comprehensive  list of 136 tank sizes, each characterized by specific values of shell  diameter, height, and thickness.  The fourth parameter, filling level, in Table 1 defines the tank filling  level, for which three different values were considered: 20%, 50%, or  80%. Therefore, a total of 408 reference tanks were considered for the  simulation, each defined by a set of geometric and filling parameters.  The internal pressure and temperature were initialized to 1 bar and  20 ◦ C, respectively. The substance inside the tank was modelled as  benzene, a liquid at 20 ◦ C with a density of 878 kg/m 3  and a vapor  pressure of 9913 Pa [60].  The fifth parameter, total heat flux, in Table 1 describes the fire  conditions defined by the heat flux to the tank wall. Twelve distinct heat  flux values were considered, ranging from 10 kW/m 2  to 125 kW/m 2 .  The lower bound, 10 kW/m 2 , corresponds to the radiation threshold at  which the TTF of atmospheric equipment exceeds 30 minutes, providing  adequate time for effective mitigation without incurring in critical  damage [57]. Conversely, the upper bound, 125 kW/m 2 , represents a  credible heat flux value to a target in severe tank fire scenarios, able to  cause target damage in a limited time span, so that effective mitigation is  not credible. Thus, the region between the lower and upper bound ra- diation values identified is that where the accuracy of TTF estimation is  more critical in order to assess the time available for effective mitigation  and the actual risk of escalation leading to domino effect.  The combination between reference tanks and the fire characteristics  led to the definition of 4896 simulated fire scenarios using the RADMOD  model. The results were collected in dataset D, which comprises 4896  rows (i.e., number of fire scenarios) and 6 columns; the first 5 columns  represent the features of the fire scenario (i.e., diameter, thickness,  height, filling level, and total heat flux), while the last column indicates  the TTF calculated by the RADMOD model.  An additional set of simulations was performed to incorporate the  effects of mitigation measures on the same fire scenarios as defined  above. Specifically, the last two parameters in Table 1 define the effect  of the safety barriers adopted to mitigate the impact of the fire. The  "activation time" represents the time required to activate the barrier, and  the "damping factor" indicates the reduction in the total heat load caused  by the activation of the safety barrier. Therefore, the net incident radi- ation at time t can be calculated as  q(t)= { qift<t a q(1 α )ift≥t a ,(1)  Where  q(t)indicates the net incident radiation on the tank wall at  time t, q represents the total heat flux defined in Table 1, t a  indicates the  barrier activation time, and  α∈[0,1]is the damping factor. Therefore,  the effect of the mitigation measures is to reduce by a factor  α the net  incident radiation after t a  seconds. Activation time and dumping values  were chosen based on reference values for automatic devices, such as  fixed water sprays. Specifically, activation times are randomly sampled  between 30s and 90s, while dumping factors are sampled between 0.2  and 0.8. Each of the 4896 fire scenarios described earlier was associated  with a specific barrier configuration (i.e., t a  and α), and RADMOD was  used to simulate the mitigated scenarios. Results were collected in  dataset  D, which contains the TTF values of mitigated scenarios cor- responding to the fire scenarios in dataset D. Therefore, the  D dataset  contains the same number of rows as D, but it has two more columns,  Figure 2.Comparison between the TTF obtained from RADMOD and the TTF  obtained from FEM analysis for atmospheric tanks of various volumes [26].  Table 1  The set of variables that defines a fire scenario and their values used in the simulations. * indicates that the values are taken from Table A-2a of API 650 (American  Petroleum Institute, 2021)    Parameter Values  Tank (geometric) External diameter* [m] 20 values between 3 and 66  Wall thickness* [m] 38 values between 0.005 and 0.012  Height* [m] 10 values between 1.8 and 18  Tank (loading) Filling level [%] {20, 50, 80}  Fire Total heat flux [kW/m 2 ] {10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 110, 125}  Mitigation measures Activation time [s] Randomly sampled between 30 and 90   Damping factor Randomly sampled between 0.2 and 0.8   N. Tamascelli et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 5 respectively reporting the activation time and the damping factor of the  mitigation measures.  2.2. Data preparation and preprocessing  The two datasets described in the previous section served as the basis  for the application of the methodology. However, before developing the  machine learning (ML) models, the datasets needed to be preprocessed  to arrange the data in a suitable format and facilitate the upcoming  analysis. The datasets were split into two parts. The first part was used to  train the ML models, while the second was used to evaluate their per- formance. The dataset D was split into D train  and D eval , where the  former comprises 80% of the scenarios included in D, and the latter  contains the remaining observations. Similarly,  D was split into D train  and D eval , respectively comprising 80% and 20% of the events in D. Finally, data were normalized to have zero mean and unit standard  deviation. Specifically, a value x in the j-th column of the dataset is  normalized as  z= x μ j σ j (2)  Where z indicates the normalized value,  μ j  represents the mean of  column j and  σ j  is the standard deviation of column j. This procedure,  called Z-score normalization, is a widely used data preprocessing tech- nique that has been demonstrated to improve the generalization and  convergence of neural networks [61]. It is worth mentioning that only  the features of fire scenarios were normalized (i.e., the TTF was not  normalized). In addition, the normalization of the evaluation datasets  was performed using the mean and standard deviation of the training  datasets to avoid any information leakage between training data and  evaluation data.  2.3. Model training  The datasets D train  and D train  were used to develop two distinct  neural network models. The first model, trained on D train , aims at pre- dicting the TTF of unmitigated fire scenarios. The second model, trained  on  D train , aims at predicting the TTF of mitigated scenarios. The models  were developed using Keras version 2.11.0 in Python version 3.10.11.  In this study, Fully-Connected Feed-Forward Neural Networks (FC-  FFNNs) were used to model the relationship between scenario features  and the TTF. FC-FFNNs were preferred over other conventional regres- sion models (e.g., Linear regression, Support Vector Regression) due to  their excellent abstraction and generalization capabilities [61,62]. In  addition, FC-FFNNs offer a good balance between simplicity and effec- tiveness, making them an ideal choice over more advanced and complex  algorithms. In fact, FC-FFNNs are less computationally demanding,  making them suitable when computational resources are limited or for  tasks  that  do  not  require complex models. FC-FFNNs also  tend  to  generalize well and are less prone to overfitting, especially with limited  data. Their training is more straightforward, involving fewer hyper- parameters, which saves time and effort in model development. A  schematic representation of an FC-FFNN is presented in Fig. 3.  FC-FFNNs are directed acyclic graphs that comprise an input layer  (orange in Fig. 3), one or more hidden layers (blue in Fig. 3), and one  output layer (green in Fig. 3). Each layer comprises one or more units  (circles in Fig. 3), which are real-valued entities. The units of the input  layer are the features of an observation (e.g., the parameters in Table 1).  In contrast, the units of the hidden layers, also called hidden units or  hidden neurons, are calculated through a nonlinear transformation of  the linearly combined units in the previous layers [62]. Specifically, a  generic layer Z i ∈R M×1  with M neurons is computed as follows:  Z i =σ (W i ⋅Z i 1 +b i ),(3)  Where  σ is the rectified linear unit (ReLu) function [63], W i ∈R N×M  is the matrix of the weights, Z i 1 ∈R N×1  is the layer preceding Z i , and  b i ∈R M×1  is the vector of the biases. Weights and biases are learnable  parameters that are tuned during training. The network’s last layer is the  output layer (green in Fig. 3), representing the response variable (i.e.,  the TTF). Therefore, the NN aims at identifying the function f that ap- proximates the relationship between features and response:  y≈f(x)(4)  The function f comprises a set θ of learnable parameters, namely the  weights and the biases introduced in Eq. (3). Such parameters are  randomly initialized and eventually tuned during the training procedure  to minimize the error between the model’s predictions and the actual  value of the TTF. The training dataset (i.e., D train  or D train ) are used to  train the models. Specifically, examples of both features and related  TTFs are fed to the model. The model uses the features to calculate the  predicted TTF, which is compared to the actual TTF, and the resulting  error is back-propagated to update the learnable parameters θ. The  procedure is iterative and aims to find the best set of hyperparameters,  θ ∗ ,that minimizes the error between predicted TTFs ( ̃ y) and true TTFs  (y),  θ ∗ =argmin θ [l(y,̃y(θ))],(5)  Where l indicates the “loss”, a function that measures the error be- tween predictions and true responses. In this study, the mean squared  error (MSE), defined as MSE=1/N ∑ N i=1 (y i   ̃ y i ) 2 , is used as a loss  function, where N∈N is the number of scenarios included in the  training datasets. The MSE is a differentiable loss function, which helps  with network convergence. However, it is highly susceptible to the  presence of outliers, as they have the potential to heavily distort the  squared differences between predicted and actual values, resulting in  inflated error measurements. In the datasets utilized for this study,  outliers are not present, thereby making the MSE an appropriate choice  as a loss metric.  As mentioned earlier, D train  or D train  are utilized to construct two  independent models, namely M and  M, where their parameters are  optimized to predict the TTF of unmitigated and mitigated fire sce- narios, respectively. Assuming a  successful training procedure, the  Figure 3.A schematization of an FC-FFNN with three hidden layers. The input  of the model (i.e., the features) is depicted in orange. Hidden layers (Z i )and  units (Z j i )are represented in blue. The model output (i.e., the response) is  depicted in green.  N. Tamascelli et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 6 models should be capable of predicting the TTF of fire scenarios con- tained in D train  or D train  with minimal error. However, there is no  guarantee that the models will maintain the same level of accuracy when  considering new fire scenarios. Hence, evaluating the models using in- dependent scenarios is crucial to ensure their ability to generalize the  knowledge acquired during training to previously unseen events. The  evaluation procedure will be described in the following section.  2.4. Model evaluation  The trained models are evaluated on their ability to predict the TTF  of scenarios included in D eval  and D eval . The features of the fire sce- narios included in D eval  are fed to the model M, which predicts the TTFs  based on the knowledge extracted from D train . Similarly, the model M is  evaluated on  D eval . It is worth noting that only the features of fire sce- narios are fed to the model during the evaluation phase, as opposed to  the training phase, where both features and TTFs were used.  The evaluation of the models involves the calculation of performance  metrics to quantify the quality of predictions. In this study, we utilize the  following metrics:   •Coefficient of determination (R 2 ) R 2 =1  ∑ M i=1 (y i  ̃y i ) 2 ∑ M i=1 (y i  μ ) 2 (6)   Where, M∈N is the number of fire scenarios included in the  evaluation dataset, y i  and  ̃ y i  are respectively the true and predicted  TTF values, and  μ is the mean of the true TTFs.   •Root mean squared error (RMSE)  RMSE= ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 1 M ∑ M i=1 (y i  ̃y i ) 2 √ √ √ √ (7)    Typically, the coefficient of determination assumes values between  0 and 1, although negative values are possible when the model performs  worse than a constant function that simply predicts the mean of the data.  Values of R 2  close to 1 are often interpreted as a good quality of the fit,  which is generally true. However, it is important to remark that there  may be specific circumstances in which large R 2  values do not neces- sarily guarantee the usefulness of the regression model [64].  For this reason, the RMSE is also considered to overcome the limi- tations of R 2 . The RMSE may be interpreted as the square root of the  variance of the residual. Therefore, it indicates how spread out these  residuals are. This metric is bounded below by 0 but has no upper bound.  Values  of RMSE close  to 0 indicate good prediction performances.  However, it must be noted that RMSE shares the same units as the  response variable (e.g., "seconds" for TTF). Therefore, when evaluating  model performance, it is essential to consider the magnitude of the  response variable in comparison to the RMSE. Often, to remove the ef- fect of scale and enable a fair comparison between models trained on  different tasks, the RMSE is normalized using the mean of the response  variable. This normalized version is usually defined as the normalized  RMSE (NRMSE):  NRMSE= RMSE μ (8)  If the objective is to compare the performance of two or more models  on the same task, the RMSE can be used directly. In such cases, the  model with the lowest RMSE is considered to outperform the other  models.  2.5. Hyperparameters tuning  The procedures described in Sections 2.3 and 2.4 illustrate how to  train and evaluate the models M and  M for predicting the TTF of un- mitigated and  mitigated scenarios. However, no  details about  the  network hyperparameters have been provided. The hyperparameters of  a NN may be defined as non-trainable parameters that define its struc- ture and behaviour during training [65]. For example, the number of  hidden layers and neurons per layer are hyperparameters that can  significantly influence the model’s performance. Unfortunately, select- ing the right set of hyperparameters is mainly guided by background  knowledge and experimentation [66], and there is no "golden rule" to  define an optimal set of hyperparameters in hindsight.  In this study, a "grid-search" procedure [67] was used to tune the  network hyperparameters. This procedure involves (i) defining a search  space for each parameter, (ii) training and evaluating one model for  each unique combination of hyperparameters, and (iii) comparing the  performance of  the  models and  selecting the  best  set  of  hyperparameters.  The search space is defined by specifying the range or discrete values  for each hyperparameter under consideration. In this study, we focus on  three hyperparameters: the number of layers, the number of neurons per  layer, and the learning rate (LR). The number of layers and neurons  defines the network structures, as discussed in Section 2.3. The Learning  Rate is a key parameter determining the step size at which the model  updates its parameters during training. A large learning rate increases  the convergence speed but raises the risk of the model diverging and  failing to converge to an optimal solution. The search space used in this  study is defined in Table 2.  The combination of the hyperparameters leads to the definition of  5600 model configurations, each characterized by several layers, one or  more neurons per layer, and one learning rate. The grid search algorithm  systematically evaluates the  model  performance for  every  possible  combination within the defined search space. Specifically, each model  configuration is used to train and assess the models M and  M as  described in Sections 2.3 and 2.4. The training procedure was conducted  with 300 epochs, which indicates the number of iterations made by the  model over the training dataset. The selected number of epochs repre- sents a good balance between computational complexity and model  accuracy. A larger number of epochs would significantly increase the  computation time, while fewer epochs may penalize the complex models  with low learning rates because they typically require more training  samples to perform adequately.  As a result, every model configuration is associated with an RMSE  value that reflects its performance in predicting the TTF for unmitigated  events, as well as another RMSE value for predicting mitigated TTFs. The  model  that  obtains the  lowest RMSE on D eval  identifies the  best  configuration for the prediction of unmitigated TTFs, while the model  that obtains the lowestRMSE on  D eval  identifies the best configuration  for the prediction of mitigated TTFs. The two tasks (i.e., prediction of the  TTF for unmitigated and mitigated scenarios) are treated independently  because there is no guarantee that the best model for the prediction of  unmitigated TTFs will also show superior performance on the prediction  of mitigated TTFs [68].  The grid search procedure creates two models optimized for pre- dicting the TTF of unmitigated and mitigated scenarios. The first model,  namely M ∗ , takes as an input the first five parameters in Table 1, while  the second model, namely  M ∗ , requires the complete set of parameters.  Table 2  The search space used in the grid-search procedure.   Hyperparameter Values  Number of layers {1, 2, 3, 4}  Number of neurons per layer {2, 52, 102, 152, 202, 252, 302}  Learning Rate {0.01, 0.001}   N. Tamascelli et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 7 It is worth mentioning that the selection of the search space in  Table 2 has been mainly guided by background knowledge, and it is not  meant to identify the best model in absolute terms. In fact, there are  additional hyperparameters that  may  require training, such  as  the  choice of the activation function ( σ in Eq. (3)), and other parameters not  covered in this study, including batch size, regularization layers, and  optimizers [65]. Nonetheless, the search space in Table 2 encompasses  the  parameters that  the  authors consider as  the  most  crucial for  addressing the specific task at hand, striking a balance between model  performance and computational efficiency as the inclusion of additional  hyperparameters in the search space can lead to a significant increase in  computational requirements.  2.6. Definition of a standard protection measure  The model  M ∗ for evaluating mitigated scenarios, requires defining  the activation time and damping factor of the protection measure, as  discussed in Section 2.1.  These  characteristics are  site-specific and  depend on the particular fire detection and protection systems imple- mented. Therefore, there might be instances where they cannot be easily  obtained. For these reasons, a third model was developed to predict the  TTF of mitigated scenarios, namely  M ∗ , which considers a reference  protection measure with standard activation time and damping factor.  The model is intended to provide a rough estimate of the potential effect  of mitigation systems based on the performance of a reference active  barrier widely used in the current industrial practice. The model was  obtained from  M ∗ selecting the activation time and the damping factor  of a water deluge system. The activation time was set to 1 minute, which  included 30 seconds to detect the fire and 30 seconds to activate water  delivery to the nozzles [69]. The damping factor is set to 0.2, which  corresponds to a single row of nozzles, as reported by Lowesmith et al.  [70] and in accordance with the simulations carried out by Wu et al.  [71].  The third model offers a generic reference estimation of the TTF for  mitigated tanks, based on the standard performance of water deluges.  The model only intends to provide preliminary results when activation  times and damping factors of the actual mitigation barriers are un- available, e.g., when considering installing protection measures in a  preliminary design phase. If the actual activation times and damping  factors are known, model  M must be used since it provides far more  accurate data.  2.7. Predictions and confidence intervals  The optimized models M ∗ and M ∗ , can predict the TTF of unmiti- gated and mitigated scenarios. Furthermore, the specialized model  M ∗ can be used to simulate the effect of a standard water deluge system.  However, in most practical applications, predicting a confidence inter- val rather than a single precise value for the TTF is often preferable. This  is because confidence intervals provide a range of potential values that  captures the uncertainty and variability associated with the prediction.  In fact, if a fire scenario differs significantly from those used during  training, it is reasonable to expect larger uncertainties associated with  the  prediction of  the  TTF.  In  such  cases,  it  becomes crucial to  acknowledge the potential uncertainties and incorporate a larger con- fidence interval in the prediction.  This study used a model-agnostic method called "jacknife+" to esti- mate  predictive confidence intervals [72].  The  confidence interval  produced by jacknife+can be summarized as follows. Let X i  and y i  respectively indicate the features and the response variable of the i-th  observation in a training dataset that comprises n samples. The confi- dence interval of a new observation X n+1  is defined as:  ̂ C n,α = [ ̂q   n, α { ̂ μ  i (X n+1 ) R LOO i } ,̂q + n, α { ̂ μ  i (X n+1 ) R LOO i } ] ,(9)   where  ̂ C n,α  indicates the  confidence interval in  the  form  [TTF min ,  TTF max ], α∈[0,1]indicates the uncertainty of the confidence interval,  ̂ q   n, α [•]and  ̂ q + n, α [•]respectively represents the α and 1- α quantiles,  ̂ μ  i  is  the regression model fitted on all the examples in the training database  except the i-th observation, and R LOO i =[y i   ̂ μ  i (X i )]is the residual of the  i-th observation. A detailed description of the theoretical foundations  and implementation of the method can be found in the original reference  [72] and the Python library description [73]. In summary, the jacknife+ method extends the traditional jacknife resampling technique [74] by  addressing algorithm instability, offering robust coverage guarantees  without requiring any assumptions apart from having independent and  identically distributed samples.  Therefore, incorporating the jacknife+method, the output of the  models M ∗ , M ∗ , and M ∗ includes not only the predicted TTF but also the  corresponding minimum and maximum TTF values, indicating that the  true TTF is expected to lie between these two values with a confidence  level of 95%.  3. Results  The best model configurations identified by the grid-search proced- ure (see Section 2.5) are shown in Table 3. The table reports the  determination coefficient, R 2 , and the root mean squared error, RMSE,  that may be considered as the main performance metrics of the model.  The results reported in Table 3 indicate that the model for predicting  unmitigated scenarios (M ∗ ) achieves lower RMSE and larger R 2  than the  model that predicts mitigated scenarios ( M ∗ and M ∗ ). However, the  TTFs of mitigated scenarios are expected to be higher than those of  unmitigated scenarios. Therefore, the RMSE was normalized to remove  the effect of scale and to allow a fair comparison between the models.  Figs. 4 and 5 provide illustrative examples of the model output,  intended to exemplify the potential use of the unmitigated (M ∗ ) and  mitigated ( M ∗ , M ∗ ) models, and to demonstrate their accuracy and  robustness under different working conditions. A reference tank con- taining benzene at 20 ◦ C and 1 atm, with diameter =6 m, height =14.4  m, shell thickness =0.005 m, filling level =20 %, and a total heat flux = 50 kW/m 2  is used for the analysis. It is important to remark that both the  tank geometry and the fire radiation considered were not included in the  training sets.  Each plot in Figs. 4 and 5 shows the effect of a single feature of the  scenario (see Table 1) while holding the others constant. In particular, in  Fig. 4, the TTF values obtained using model M ∗ for unprotected tanks  are reported with respect to thermal radiation (a), shell diameter (b),  shell thickness (c), tank height (d), and filling degree (e). The shell  thickness of the reference tank was increased to 0.01 m in Fig 4b in order  to ensure physical integrity across the whole range of shell diameters. As  shown in the figure, the model predicted values (predicted TTF) show a  good agreement with the results of the RADMOD model (true TTF)  across the entire feature space. The relatively small confidence intervals  indicate low  uncertainty in  the  predictions. The  computation time  required to perform one prediction is approximately 23.7 milliseconds  for both models.  Table 3  Best model configurations for the prediction of mitigated and unmitigated TTFs.  R 2  and RMSE are calculated according to Eq. (6) and (7), NRMSE is calculated  according to Eq. (8).   Model Layers Neurons  R 2  RMSE  [s]  NRMSE  M ∗ (unmitigated) 2 {152, 52} 0.9999 1.66 0.006  M ∗ and M ∗ (mitigated)  3 {102, 152,  2}  0.9925 71 0.124   N. Tamascelli et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 8 Figure 4.TTF values calculated by model M ∗ for an unmitigated tank with diameter =6 m, height =14.4 m, shell thickness =0.005 m, filling level =20 %,  containing benzene initially at 20 ◦ C and 1 bar, exposed to a total heat flux =50 kW/m 2 . Each plot examines the effect of a specific tank feature while holding the  others constant: (a) total heat flux, (b) diameter, (c) thickness, (d) height, and (e) filling degree.  N. Tamascelli et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 9 The analysis of mitigated model results is shown in Fig. 5. Specif- ically, Fig. 5.a illustrates the TTF values versus the damping factor  calculated considering an activation time of 40 seconds. Fig. 5b shows  the effect of activation time considering a safety barrier with damping  factor equal to 0.4. Also in this case a good agreement with simulated  data is present, even if confidence intervals are larger, indicating that  the model  M ∗ is associated with higher uncertainties. Fig. 5c compares  the TTF values calculated by the model M ∗ for an unmitigated tank, and  model  M ∗ that considers the reference water deluge system introduced  in section 2.6. As shown in the figure, the presence and activation of the  water deluge results in a relevant increase of TTF values (up to 27 %)  with respect to the values calculated for unmitigated tanks. The differ- ence is larger for lower values of heat radiation and rapidly decreases as  the heat load increases. The trend can be attributed to the intensified  influence of higher heat loads before barrier activation (i.e., during the  initial 60 seconds), rapidly pushing the tank closer to its mechanical  limits and thus diminishing the benefits of the water deluge system.  Figs. 4 and 5 evidence the strong non-linear correlation among the  TTF and thermal radiation, corroborating the findings from Landucci  et al. [26]. Thus, the effect on the TTF of the dynamic behaviour of  thermal radiation induced by the presence of mitigation systems and by  environmental facts is complex. Models based on the thermal dose  concept, as that of Zhou et al. [75], were proposed to capture such ef- fects, but the discussion of such approaches falls out of the scope of the  present paper.  The analysis of mitigated model results is shown in Fig. 5. Specif- ically, Fig. 5a illustrates the TTF values versus the damping factor  calculated considering an activation time of 40 seconds. Fig. 5b shows  the effect of activation time considering a safety barrier with damping  factor equal to 0.4. Also in this case a good agreement with simulated  data is present, even if confidence intervals are larger, indicating that  the model  M ∗ is associated with higher uncertainties. Fig. 5c compares  the TTF values calculated by the model M ∗ for an unmitigated tank, and  model  M ∗ that considers the reference water deluge system introduced  in section 2.6. As shown in the figure, the presence and activation of the  water deluge results in a relevant increase of TTF values (up to 27 %)  with respect to the values calculated for unmitigated tanks. The differ- ence is larger for lower values of heat radiation and rapidly decreases as  the heat load increases. The trend can be attributed to the intensified  influence of higher heat loads before barrier activation (i.e., during the  Figure 5.TTF values calculated by model M ∗ (a, b,c) and model M ∗ (d) for a mitigated tank with diameter =6 m, height =14.4 m, shell thickness =0.005 m, filling  level =20 %, total heat flux =50 kW/m 2 , activation time =40 s, damping factor =0.4, and containing benzene initially at 20 ◦ C and 1 bar. Panels a and b examine  the effect of the damping factor (a) and activation time (b) while holding the other tank characteristics constant. Panel c illustrates the combined effect of varying the  activation time and the total heat flux. Panel d shows the comparison of the TTF for an unmitigated fire and a fire mitigated by water deluges.  N. Tamascelli et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 10 initial 60 seconds), rapidly pushing the tank closer to its mechanical  limits and thus diminishing the benefits of the water deluge system.  Fig. 5c shows the combined effect of the heat radiation intensity and  of the barrier activation time on the TTF. As expected, the results  confirm that the TTF increases as the activation time of the barrier de- creases. The effect is more relevant at high values of the heat radiation,  where the TTF is lower and the activation time approaches the TTF of  the unmitigated scenario. Nevertheless, when the activation time equals  the TTF of the unmitigated fire scenarios, the mitigated and unmitigated  TTF values coincide (since actually the mitigation starts after tank fail- ure). This observation also underscores a good agreement between the  mitigated and unmitigated models, as they produce comparable TTF  values when the barrier activation time coincides with the unmitigated  TTF.  To gain further insights into the performance of the models, the  distribution of residuals was calculated for both models M ∗ and M ∗ . The 

## results

 are illustrated in Fig. 6a and Fig. 6b, respectively.  Residuals represent the difference between actual and predicted  TTFs of the fire scenarios in the evaluation dataset. Fig. 6a shows that  most residuals of the model M ∗ are smaller than 10 seconds in absolute  terms. Only one prediction returned a residual of -15 seconds. Also, the  distribution appears centered around 0, with most residuals between -5  and +5 seconds. Similarly, Fig. 6b shows that most residuals of the  model  M ∗ are close to 0, but the distribution appears more skewed to- ward negative values, with three outliers around -973, -673, and -378  seconds.  A comprehensive analysis was conducted to compare the model  performance M ∗ ,with the simplified correlations proposed by Landucci  et al. [26] and Yang et al. [27]. The models were tested based on the  ability to predict the TTFs of the unmitigated fire scenarios included in  D eval  dataset (see section 2.2). A comparison between the RMSE values  obtained by the model M ∗ and the correlations by Landucci et al. [26]  and Yang et al. [27] is shown in Table 4. The results show that while the  model of Yang et al. [27] has a slightly better performance than that of  Landucci et al. [26], the new model developed outperforms the previous  approaches. Specifically, it reduces the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)  by an order of magnitude compared to the correlations by Landucci et al.  [26] and Yang et al. [27].  A comparison between the three models is offered in Fig. 7, show- casing ’predicted versus actual’ plots the new model developed in the  present study to that of Landucci et al. [26] (Fig. 7a) and of Yang et al.  [27] (Fig. 7b).  The results confirm that the model proposed in this study aligns  remarkably well with the RADMOD data, exhibiting a high accuracy in  reproducing RADMOD results. On the contrary, the correlations pro- posed by Landucci et al. [26] and Yang et al. [27] result in larger errors,  in particular when high values of TTFs are considered.  4. Discussion  The results presented above indicate that the models developed in the  present study effectively predict the time-to-failure (TTF) of atmospheric  tanks exposed to external fire, using a minimal set of input data and  requiring a reduced computational effort. This approach provides safety  practitioners and researchers with models that are not only user-friendly  and accurate but also highly interpretable. Additionally, the seamless  integration of safety barriers within this framework represents a notable  advancement in the risk assessment of fire-induced domino scenarios.  The results indicate that the models show a relatively good perfor- mance. However, model M ∗ (that considers unprotected tanks) exhibits  a higher robustness and accuracy with respect to models  M ∗ and M ∗ (that consider the effect of safety barriers), as confirmed by the smaller  confidence intervals in Fig. 4 and by the distributions of the residuals  shown in Fig. 6. The better performance of the model predicting the TTF  values for unmitigated fire scenarios can be attributed to the challenge  of predicting the effects of safety barriers with variable activation times  and damping factors. This complexity demands a more sophisticated  approach to accurately capture the impact of safety measures, as evi- denced by the need for additional layers and neurons per layer, as shown  in Table 3.  Figure 6.Residuals of the model M ∗ (a) and M ∗ (b). Residuals are calculated as the difference between the true TTF and the predicted TTF of fire scenarios included  in the evaluation datasets.  Table 4  Comparison between RMSE values obtained by the model  presented in this study and state-of-the-art correlations.  Only the events include D eval  were considered in the  analysis.   Approach RMSE [s]  The present study 1.66  Landucci et al. [26] 162.9  Yang et al. [27] 106.4   N. Tamascelli et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 11 The results presented in Figs. 4 and 5 provide some key insights into  the factors influencing the TTF in the given scenarios. The analysis  shows that the total heat flux, along with the shell diameter and thick- ness, have a great influence on the TTF. Conversely, the height of the  tank and its filling degree have a less significant, almost negligible,  impact. Considering the effect of safety barriers, Fig. 5 suggests that the  damping factor exerts a more substantial influence than the activation  time. It is imperative to stress that a careful and accurate assessment of  the activation time, particularly in comparison to the TTF in unmitigated  fire scenarios, is a key determinant of the barrier effectiveness.  The NN model addressing the simulation of unmitigated scenarios  (M ∗ ) outperforms the simplified correlations reported in the literature  [21,26], which are not conceived to capture the dynamics of the fire  scenarios. Also, the simplified correlations do not consider the effect of  the tank filling degree. In contrast, the proposed models may be easily  tailored to the specific case of interest, is accurate, and provides results  rapidly, requiring limited computational resources. Thus, the NN models  are excellent candidates for dynamic frameworks to assess safety bar- riers and the risk generated by potential escalations resulting in domino  scenarios.  Despite these promising results, it is important to acknowledge some  limitations of the NN models developed and some potential areas for  future improvements. Firstly, the models were trained using data from a  simplified lumped model (i.e., RADMOD), which may, in turn, introduce  errors in estimating the TTF values. Incorporating more rigorous TTF  data, such as those obtained from large-scale experimental set-ups and/  or validated CFD and FEM models, could enhance the performance of  the NN models. In this context, the approach shown in the present study  demonstrates the potential of coupling first principles modelling and ML  for the construction of metamodels that can offer fast and reliable pre- dictions, thereby decreasing the computational burden of techniques  requiring many simulations.  Another limitation that needs to be pinpointed is the larger uncer- tainty associated with the TTF calculated from the model considering  mitigated scenarios with respect to those obtained from the model  considering unprotected tanks. Future work should focus on exploring a  more extensive set of data and hyperparameters, including regulariza- tion layers, on enhancing the performance of  M ∗ .  In addition, it is crucial to emphasize that the models developed in  this study are intended as surrogate tools to calculate the Time to Failure  (TTF) and are not meant to replace comprehensive dynamic risk analysis  procedures. Fire spread and evolution are intricate phenomena shaped  by a multitude of factors. Actually, both environmental aspects, as at- mospheric conditions and the tank position relative to the fire, and  human factors, such as individual behaviours and the timeliness and  efficacy of emergency response, influence the fire scenario. The factors  that influence the fire intensity, such as the type of ignited substance, air  transmissivity, and view factor must be considered in models addressing  the simulation of the fire scenario. To this end, several literature models  provide correlations that can be used to link environmental aspects to  the total incident radiation (e.g. see [76]). Furthermore, comprehensive  frameworks are available to address the dynamic evolution of fire sce- narios also considering emergency response [30,77]. Such models pro- vide the intensity of the thermal radiation and the duration of the fire,  that are input parameters to the models developed in the present study,  focusing on the improved estimation of TTF also considering mitigation  measures. Environmental and human factors shall thus be considered  upstream, prior to the application of the models developed, allowing for  a more targeted and effective integration into the overall risk assessment  process.  Finally, it is worth mentioning that the models proposed in this study  are not specifically designed to provide conservative predictions, as  indicated by the residuals in Fig. 6. The figure shows that the errors are  likely to be both negative or positive, meaning that the predicted TTF is  not always guaranteed to be smaller than the true TTF. This behaviour is  at least in part mitigated by the confidence intervals, which offer an  estimation of the uncertainty affecting the TTF. The confidence interval  allows a better understanding of the robustness of the predictions,  allowing more informed judgments based on the level of confidence  associated with the prediction.  Despite the abovementioned limitations, this study provides accurate  and user-friendly tools, enabling a straightforward evaluation of fire  scenarios under mitigated and unmitigated conditions. The toolbox of  developed models may thus  significantly benefit the assessment of  domino scenarios triggered by the fire. The model’s capabilities in  predicting TTFs for atmospheric tanks and considering the effect of  mitigation systems provide new  opportunities to  enhance the  risk  assessment and safety evaluation of cascading events leading to domino  effects. From a practitioners’ viewpoint, the availability of a toolbox of  user-friendly models, able to incorporate the effect of mitigation mea- sures without the need of a specific expertise, provides a crucial support  Figure 7.Comparison between the performance of the model M ∗ (blue), the simplified correlations proposed by Landucci et al. [26] (a) and the correlation proposed  by Yang et al. [27] (b). Displayed TTFs refer to unmitigated scenarios included in the D eval  dataset (see Section 2)  N. Tamascelli et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 12 to risk-informed decision-making in displaying safety barriers and safety  systems aimed to prevent escalation and domino effect.  5. Conclusions  This study is pioneering in proposing using Neural Networks to es- timate the TTF of atmospheric tanks exposed to external fires, also  considering the  effect  of  mitigative actions. A  model  toolbox was  developed, including NN-based modes allowing the TTF calculation for  unprotected tanks and for tanks protected by active and/or passive  safety barriers. The models consider the effect of various types of safety  measures and safety systems in terms of activation time and effective- ness in reducing the heat load, thus allowing the simulation of a wide  range of safety barriers. The models require only a minimal set of input  parameters, thus  resulting user-friendly and  straightforward to  configure. The predictions are fast and accurate, making the models  suitable for  the  dynamic analysis of  domino scenarios. The  newly  developed NN-based models outperform the simplified correlations used  in the current practice to estimate TTF, allowing a more accurate  calculation of TTF values. Overall, the method demonstrates the po- tential of coupling digital simulations and ML models to decrease the  computational burden, enabling faster and more efficient predictions in  complex accident scenarios.  CRediT authorship contribution statement  Nicola Tamascelli: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology,  Investigation, Data  curation, Conceptualization. Giordano Emrys  Scarponi: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Data  curation, Conceptualization. Md Tanjin Amin: Validation, Investiga- tion, Conceptualization. Zaman Sajid: Writing – review & editing,  Validation, Investigation. Nicola Paltrinieri: Writing – review & edit- ing, Validation, Methodology. Faisal Khan: Writing – review & editing,  Supervision, Investigation, Conceptualization. Valerio Cozzani:  Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Methodology,  Conceptualization.  Declaration of competing interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial  interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence  the work reported in this paper.  Data availability  Data will be made available on request.  Supplementary materials  Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in  the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ress.2024.109974. 

## References

  [1] Vipin, Pandey SK, Tauseef SM, Abbasi T, Abbasi SA. Pool fires in chemical process  industries: occurrence, mechanism, management. J Failure Anal Prevent 2018;18:  1224–61. https://doi.org/10.1007/$s11668$$-018-0517-2.  [2] Lees F. Fire. Lees’ loss prevention in the process industries. Elsevier; 2012.  p. 1075–366. https://doi.org/10.1016/$B978$$-0-12-397189-0.00016-1.  [3] Abdolhamidzadeh B, Abbasi T, Rashtchian D, Abbasi SA. Domino effect in process-  industry accidents – An inventory of past events and identification of some  patterns. J Loss Prev Process Ind 2011;24:575–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  jlp.2010.06.013.  [4] Huang K, Chen G, Khan F, Yang Y. Dynamic analysis for fire-induced domino  effects in chemical process industries. Process Saf Environ Protect 2021;148:  686–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2021.01.042.  [5] Naderpour M, Khakzad N. Texas LPG fire: domino effects triggered by natural  hazards. Proc Saf Environ Protect 2018;116:354–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  psep.2018.03.008.  [6] Fishwick T. The fire and explosion at Indian Oil Corporation, Jaipur — a summary  of events and outcomes. Loss Prevent Bull 2011:9–13.  [7] U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board, 2023. Storage tank fire at  intercontinental terminals company, LLC (ITC) Terminal -investigation report.  [8] Khan F, Reniers G, Cozzani V. Domino effect: its prediction and prevention,  methods in chemical process safety, ISBN. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2021,  9780323915151.  [9] Khan FI, Abbasi S. An assessment of the likelihood of occurrence, and the damage  potential of domino effect (chain of accidents) in a typical cluster of industries.  J Loss Prev Process Ind 2001;14:283–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/$S0950$$-4230  (00)00048-6.  [10] Cozzani V, Reniers G. Dynamic risk assessment and management of domino effects  and cascading events in the process industry. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2021. ISBN:  9780081028384.  [11] Reniers G, Cozzani V. Domino effects in the process industries: modelling,  prevention and managing. 2013.  [12] Godoy LA. Buckling of vertical oil storage steel tanks: review of static buckling  studies. Thin-Walled Struct 2016;103:1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  tws.2016.01.026.  [13] Godoy LA, Jaca RC, Ameijeiras MP. On buckling of oil storage tanks under nearby  explosions and fire. Above ground storage tank oil spills. Elsevier; 2023.  p. 199–259. https://doi.org/10.1016/$B978$$-0-323-85728-4.00004-8.  [14] Lees F. Storage. Lees’ loss prevention in the process industries. Elsevier; 2012.  p. 1889–985. https://doi.org/10.1016/$B978$$-0-12-397189-0.00022-7.  [15] Yang R, Khan F, Neto ET, Rusli R, Ji J. Could pool fire alone cause a domino effect?  Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2020;202:106976. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  ress.2020.106976.  [16] Iannaccone T, Scarponi GE, Landucci G, Cozzani V. Numerical simulation of LNG  tanks exposed to fire. Process Saf Environ Protect 2021;149:735–49. https://doi.  org/10.1016/j.psep.2021.03.027.  [17] Scarponi G, Landucci G, Birk A, Cozzani V. CFD study of the fire response of vessels  containing liquefied gases. Chem Eng Trans 2019;77:373–8. https://doi.org/  10.3303/$CET1977063$$. SE-Research Articles.  [18] Masum Jujuly M, Rahman A, Ahmed S, Khan F. LNG pool fire simulation for  domino effect analysis. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2015;143:19–29. https://doi.org/  10.1016/j.ress.2015.02.010.  [19] Li X, Chen G, Khan F, Lai E, Amyotte P. Analysis of structural response of storage  tanks subject to synergistic blast and fire loads. J Loss Prev Process Ind 2022;80:  104891. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2022.104891.  [20] Wang M, Wang J, Yu X, Zong R. Experimental and numerical study of the thermal  response of a diesel fuel tank exposed to fire impingement. Appl Therm Eng 2023;  227:120334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2023.120334.  [21] Yang Jianfeng, Zhang B, Chen L, Diao X, Hu Y, Suo G, Li R, Wang Q, Li J, Zhang J,  Dou Z. Improved solid radiation model for thermal response in large crude oil  tanks. Energy 2023;284:128572. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2023.128572.  [22] Gubinelli G. Models for the assessment of domino accidents in the process industry.  University of Pisa; 2005.  [23] Paltrinieri N, Khan F, Cozzani V. Coupling of advanced techniques for dynamic risk  management. J Risk Res 2015;18:910–30. https://doi.org/10.1080/  13669877.2014.919515.  [24] Villa V, Paltrinieri N, Khan F, Cozzani V. Towards dynamic risk analysis: a review  of the risk assessment approach and its limitations in the chemical process  industry. Saf Sci 2016;89:77–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2016.06.002.  [25] Maidana RG, Parhizkar T, Gomola A, Utne IB, Mosleh A. Supervised dynamic  probabilistic risk assessment: review and comparison of methods. Reliab Eng Syst  Saf 2023;230:108889. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2022.108889.  [26] Landucci G, Gubinelli G, Antonioni G, Cozzani V. The assessment of the damage  probability of storage tanks in domino events triggered by fire. Accid Anal Prevent  2009;41:1206–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2008.05.006.  [27] Yang Jiahao, Zhang M, Zuo Y, Cui X, Liang C. Improved models of failure time for  atmospheric tanks under the coupling effect of multiple pool fires. J Loss Prev  Process Ind 2023;81:104957. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2022.104957.  [28] Khakzad N, Khan F, Amyotte P, Cozzani V. Risk management of domino effects  considering dynamic consequence analysis. Risk Anal 2014;34:1128–38. https://  doi.org/10.1111/risa.12158.  [29] Ji J, Tong Q, Khan F, Dadashzadeh M, Abbassi R. Risk-based domino effect analysis  for fire and explosion accidents considering uncertainty in processing facilities. Ind  Eng Chem Res 2018;57:3990–4006. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.8$b00103$$.  [30] Zeng T, Chen G, Yang Y, Chen P, Reniers G. Developing an advanced dynamic risk  analysis method for fire-related domino effects. Process Saf Environ Prot 2020;134:  149–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2019.11.029.  [31] Su M, Wei L, Zhou S, Yang G, Wang R, Duo Y, Chen S, Sun M, Li J, Kong X. Study on  dynamic probability and quantitative risk calculation method of domino accident  in pool fire in chemical storage tank area. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2022;19:  16483. https://doi.org/10.3390/$ijerph192416483$$.  [32] Zhou J, Reniers G. Dynamic analysis of fire induced domino effects to optimize  emergency response policies in the chemical and process industry. J Loss Prev  Process Ind 2022;79:104835. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2022.104835.  [33] Ricci F, Misuri A, Scarponi GE, Cozzani V, Demichela M. Vulnerability assessment  of industrial sites to interface fires and wildfires. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2024;243:  109895. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2023.109895.  N. Tamascelli et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 245 (2024) 109974 13 [34] Chen F, Zhang M, Song J, Zheng F. Risk analysis on domino effect caused by pool  fire in petroliferous tank farm. Procedia Eng 2018;211:46–54. https://doi.org/  10.1016/j.proeng.2017.12.136.  [35] Cui X, Zhang M, Pan W. Dynamic probability analysis on accident chain of  atmospheric tank farm based on Bayesian network. Process Saf Environ Protect  2022;158:146–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2021.10.040.  [36] Yang Y, Chen G, Chen P. The probability prediction method of domino effect  triggered by lightning in chemical tank farm. Process Saf Environ Protect 2018;  116:106–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2018.01.019.  [37] Landucci G, Argenti F, Tugnoli A, Cozzani V. Quantitative assessment of safety  barrier performance in the prevention of domino scenarios triggered by fire. Reliab  Eng Syst Saf 2015;143:30–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2015.03.023.  [38] Xu Z, Saleh JH. Machine learning for reliability engineering and safety  applications: review of current status and future opportunities. Reliab Eng Syst Saf  2021;211:107530. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2021.107530.  [39] Abid A, Khan MT, Iqbal J. A review on fault detection and diagnosis techniques:  basics and beyond. Artif Intell Rev 2021;54:3639–64. https://doi.org/10.1007/  $s10462$$-020-09934-2.  [40] Wang H, Zheng J, Xiang J. Online bearing fault diagnosis using numerical  simulation models and machine learning classifications. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2023;  234:109142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2023.109142.  [41] Nassif AB, Talib MA, Nasir Q, Dakalbab FM. Machine learning for anomaly  detection: a systematic review. IEEE Access 2021;9:78658–700. https://doi.org/  10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3083060.  [42] Zhang C, Hu D, Yang T. Research of artificial intelligence operations for wind  turbines considering anomaly detection, root cause analysis, and incremental  training. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2024;241:109634. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  ress.2023.109634.  [43] Huang C, Bu S, Lee HH, Chan KW, Yung WKC. Prognostics and health management  for induction machines: a comprehensive review. J Intell Manuf 2023. https://doi.  org/10.1007/$s10845$$-023-02103-6.  [44] Xia T, Dong Y, Xiao L, Du S, Pan E, Xi L. Recent advances in prognostics and health  management for advanced manufacturing paradigms. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2018;  178:255–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2018.06.021.  [45] Payette M, Abdul-Nour G. Machine learning applications for reliability  engineering: a review. Sustainability 2023;15:6270. https://doi.org/10.3390/  $su15076270$$.  [46] Roy A, Chakraborty S. Support vector machine in structural reliability analysis: a  review. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2023;233:109126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  ress.2023.109126.  [47] Hegde J, Rokseth B. Applications of machine learning methods for engineering risk  assessment – a review. Saf Sci 2020;122:104492. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  ssci.2019.09.015.  [48] Bai G, Su Y, Rahman MM, Wang Z. Prognostics of Lithium-Ion batteries using  knowledge-constrained machine learning and Kalman filtering. Reliab Eng Syst Saf  2023;231:108944. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2022.108944.  [49] Li J, Mao W, Yang B, Meng Z, Tong K, Yu S. RUL prediction of rolling bearings  across working conditions based on multi-scale convolutional parallel memory  domain adaptation network. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2024;243:109854. https://doi.  org/10.1016/j.ress.2023.109854.  [50] Arias Chao M, Kulkarni C, Goebel K, Fink O. Fusing physics-based and deep  learning models for prognostics. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2022;217:107961. https://doi.  org/10.1016/j.ress.2021.107961.  [51] Cao L, Zhang H, Meng Z, Wang X. A parallel GRU with dual-stage attention  mechanism model integrating uncertainty quantification for probabilistic RUL  prediction of wind turbine bearings. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2023;235:109197. https://  doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2023.109197.  [52] Calzolari G, Liu W. Deep learning to replace, improve, or aid CFD analysis in built  environment applications: a review. Build Environ 2021;206:108315. https://doi.  org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108315.  [53] Kudela J, Matousek R. Recent advances and applications of surrogate models for  finite element method computations: a review. Soft comput 2022;26:13709–33.  https://doi.org/10.1007/$s00500$$-022-07362-8.  [54] Li Q, Wang Y, Chen W, Li L, Hao H. Machine learning prediction of BLEVE loading  with graph neural networks. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2024;241:109639. https://doi.  org/10.1016/j.ress.2023.109639.  [55] Ye Z, Hsu S-C. Predicting real-time deformation of structure in fire using machine  learning with CFD and FEM. Autom Constr 2022;143:104574. https://doi.org/  10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104574.  [56] Amin MT, Scarponi GE, Cozzani V, Khan F. Dynamic Domino Effect Assessment  ($D2$$EA) in tank farms using a machine learning-based approach. Comput Chem Eng  2024;181:108556. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2023.108556.  [57] Cozzani V, Gubinelli G, Salzano E. Escalation thresholds in the assessment of  domino accidental events. J. Hazard. Mater. 2006;129:1–21. https://doi.org/  10.1016/j.jhazmat.2005.08.012.  [58] Amin MT, Scarponi GE, Cozzani V, Khan F. Improved pool fire-initiated domino  effect assessment in atmospheric tank farms using structural response. Reliab Eng  Syst Saf 2024;242:109751. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2023.109751.  [59] American Petroleum Institute. API 650 - citeWelded Tanks for oil storage. 2021.  [60] Green DW, Perry RH. Perry’s chemical engineers’ handbook, eighth edition. 8th ed.  New York: McGraw-Hill Education; 2008. /. editorISBN:9780071422949.  [61] Goodfellow IJ, Bengio Y, Courville A. Deep learning. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT  Press; 2016.  [62] Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman J. The elements of statistical learning, springer  series in statistics. New York, NY: Springer New York; 2009. https://doi.org/  10.1007/978-0-387-84858-7.  [63] Sharma Sagar, Sharma Simone, Athaiya A. Activation functions in neural networks.  Towards Data Sci 2017;6:310–6.  [64] Hahn, G.J., 2007. The coefficient of determination exposed !  [65] Yu, T., Zhu, H., 2020. Hyper-parameter optimization: a review of algorithms and  applications.  [66] Yang L, Shami A. On hyperparameter optimization of machine learning algorithms:  theory and practice. Neurocomputing 2020;415:295–316. https://doi.org/  10.1016/j.neucom.2020.07.061.  [67] Liashchynskyi, Petro, Liashchynskyi, Pavlo, 2019. Grid search, random search,  genetic algorithm: a big comparison for NAS.  [68] Wolpert DH, Macready WG. No free lunch theorems for optimization. IEEE Trans  Evol Comput 1997;1:67–82. https://doi.org/10.1109/4235.585893.  [69] NORSOK. Technical safety - NORSOK S-001:2020+AC. 2020.  [70] Lowesmith BJ, Hankinson G, Acton MR, Chamberlain G. An overview of the nature  of hydrocarbon jet fire hazards in the oil and gas industry and a simplified  approach to assessing the hazards. Process Saf Environ Protect 2007;85:207–20.  https://doi.org/10.1205/$psep06038$$.  [71] Wu Z, Hou L, Wu S, Wu X, Liu F. The time-to-failure assessment of large crude oil  storage tank exposed to pool fire. Fire Saf J 2020;117:103192. https://doi.org/  10.1016/j.firesaf.2020.103192.  [72] Barber, R.F., Candes, E.J., Ramdas, A., Tibshirani, R.J., 2019. Predictive inference  with the jackknife+.  [73] Taquet, V., Blot, V., Morzadec, T., Lacombe, L., Brunel, N., 2022. MAPIE an open-  source library for distribution-free uncertainty quantification.  [74] Efron B, Gong G. A leisurely look at the bootstrap, the jackknife, and cross-  validation. Am Stat 1983;37:36–48. https://doi.org/10.1080/  00031305.1983.10483087.  [75] Zhou J, Reniers G, Cozzani V. Improved probit models to assess equipment failure  caused by domino effect accounting for dynamic and synergistic effects of multiple  fires. Process Saf Environ Protect 2021;154:306–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  psep.2021.08.020.  [76] van den Bosch, C.J.H., Weterings, R.A.P.M., 2005. Heat flux from fires, in: methods  for the calculation of physical effects due to releases of Hazardous Materials  (Liquids and Gases).  [77] Chen C, Reniers G, Yang M. Dynamic risk assessment of fire-induced domino effects  bt - Integrating Safety and security management to protect chemical industrial  areas from domino effects. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2022.  p. 49–68. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-88911-1_2. Chen, C., Reniers, G.,  Yang, M.  N. Tamascelli et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
