# Predictive maintenance for aircraft



International Journal of Aviation Science and Engineering  e-ISSN: 2715-6958                 p-ISSN: 2721-5342              Volume 3, Issue 1, June 2021, page 37-44 doi: 10.47355/AVIA.$V3$$$I1$$.45    AVIA  Review Article  Predictive Maintenance for Aircraft Engine Using  Machine Learning: Trends and Challenges  F A Adryan 1,* , K W Sastra 1  1 Department of Physics, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Universitas Indonesia, Depok  Campus, 16424, Depok, Indonesia     * Correspondence: adryan.$fitra01$$@ui.ac.id  Received: 20 April 2021; Accepted: 12 June 2021; Published: 30 June 2021 

## Abstract

: This article aims to prove that Machine Learning (ML) methods are effective for Predictive  Maintenance  (PdM)  and  to  obtain  other  developing  methods  that  suitable  applied  on  PdM,  especially  for  aircraft  engine,  and  potential  method  that  can  apply  on  future research,  and  also  compared  between  articles  in  International  and  Indonesia  institution.  Maintenance  factors  are  important to prognostic the states of a machine. PdM is one of the factor strategies based on real- time  data  to  diagnosis  a  failure  of  the  machine  through  forecasting  remaining  useful  life  (RUL),  especially on aircraft machine where the safety is priority due to enormous cost and human life. ML  is  the  technique  that  accurately  prediction  through  the  data.  Applied  ML  on  PdM  is  the  huge  contribution for saving cost and human life guarantee of safety. This work provides the literature  survey  for  recent  research  which  trends  and  challenges  on  PdM  of  aircraft  engine  using  ML  that  compared  the  research  from  international  and  Indonesia  from  2016  to  2021. Result  of  this  work  shows that ML method, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) are the  best  method  to  calculate  PdM  with  more  than  99%  on  rate  accuracy,  and  low  level  of  Indonesia  institution research which focused on PdM on aircraft engine using ML  Keywords: Aircraft engine, machine learning, remaining useful life, predictive maintenance     1. Introduction  The  capacity  of  machinery  working  cannot  last  forever,  sometimes  it  will  be  broken-down  because of out-date operation. Machinery system that included sensors are just monitoring state of  the  machine,  but  cannot  make  a  report  the  machine  in  good  or  bad  condition.  To  avoid  the  worse  event (failure) and to get information about status of a machine, maintenance strategy must apply on  machinery system that scheduled. There are three best practice of maintenance strategy Corrective,  Preventive, and Predictive Maintenance.   Corrective maintenance (CM) is the basic of maintenance strategy, this maintenance performed  when the machine stopped working. The corrective maintenance can be applied when machine have  spare,  if  not  it  will  stop  all  the  operation  and  it  will  be  disadvantages  [1],  while  preventive  maintenance (PM) is scheduled maintenance or  time-based maintenance which machine or system  periodically will be maintenance though the status of the machine in healthy condition, as example a  machine maintenance annually. Predictive maintenance (PdM) is based on preventive maintenance,  but continuous monitoring the state of machine, the maintenance performed when it is needed or in  optimal  way.  PdM  indicated  state  of  machine  to  performed  schedule  to  maintenance  based  on  historical data, integrity factors,  statistical inference methods,  and engineering  approaches [2]. The  prediction  process  needs  some  mathematical  methods  and  techniques  to  apply  on  maintenance 

International Journal of Aviation Science and Engineering 38  e-ISSN: 2715-6958                 p-ISSN: 2721-5342    Volume 3, Issue 1, June 2021, page 37-44 doi: 10.47355/AVIA.$V3$$$I1$$.45  strategy,  but  due  to  increasing  of  technology  and  methods,  machine  learning  has  possibility  to  employing PdM on every cases.  Machine learning (ML) is subsection of Artificial Intelligence, this methods or algorithm capable  to learning based on training which is the given information about something, and it can be using in  future  when  the  algorithm  applied.  There  are  three  types  of  ML:  Supervised  learning  make  calculation or prediction based on known or labeled data, unsupervised learning focus on clustering  data while process, and reinforce learning focus on interaction to environment. Deep learning (DL)  is  the  development  algorithm  from  ML  to  fix  its  limitation [3].  DL  implemented  artificial  neural  network (ANN) for its algorithm and give big impact to supervised learning method. DL algorithm  widely employed such as image processing, face and speech recognition. Both ML and DL algorithm  are suitable for prediction, classification, and make cluster process. Random Forest (RF) and SVM are  popular methods in ML, then Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)  are most frequent implemented methods in DL. As prediction tool, both ML and DL divided into two  techniques: Regression and Classify technique. Difference between two techniques is output of the  method, while regression technique is leaning on prediction value of a variable including time-series  data, labeling of variable (discrete) is focus for classify technique. The classify technique  has better  accuracy than regression [3,4].   To  validate  the  result  of  using  ML  and  DL  method,  Evaluation is  important  to  indicate  the  performance  of  the  model  that  have  been  trained.  Root  Mean  Squared  Error  (RMSE)  is  frequent  evaluation method for regression technique, this evaluation indicating how concentrated the output  is  around  the  line  of  best  fit  on  prediction  data.  The  evaluation  method  for  classify  technique  are  Accuracy defined parameter which indicating output values of prediction compared with the actual  value,  Precision  described  level  of  accuracy  between  output  of  prediction  compared  with  all  data,  and  Recall  defined  as  level  of  correct  result  compared  by  the  number  of  results  should  have  been  return, which mean the higher recall value, the higher data collected, and there is no data will miss  from accuracy and precision process [4].  Prognostic and health  management (PHM) on aviation industry will be expand because of its  effect on economic and human safety, an advance maintenance shall be applied on this industry to  inform the aircraft engines condition. PdM is a maintenance advance technique which can be apply  on aviation industry because of its high precision prediction which can reducing cost operation and  increasing the safety by calculate remaining useful time (RUL) of aircraft engines [5].                     As literature systematic review of employed ML on PdM for aircraft engine, there are previous  works  about  similar  topic  as  the  basic  information  for  this  article.  Comprehensive  survey  on  PdM  system  architecture  has  done somewhere [6], that  provide  review  of  existing  approaches  for  PdM  from traditional base to using ML and DL approaches, this work also emphasis on DL because of its  accuracy and its increasing of some researcher using DL method past five years. Carvalho, et al [7]  mentioned  before  2013  only  two  articles  about  PdM  because  of  its  new  technique  of  maintenance  strategy, as result from 0,5 articles/year on 2009-2012 and increasing significantly to 11,3 articles/year  on  2013-2018.  The  most  frequent  methods  that  using  is  RF,  ANN,  SVM,  and  k-means. Also,  other  researcher has vary ML methods can estimate Remaining Useful Life (RUL) recommended presented  Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) method for prognostic technique for aircraft fault prediction, because  the model is capable to predict engine behavior correctly [8].  This article purpose is looking for the effective and optimal method to calculate PdM, specially  on aircraft engine, and potential method that can apply on future research. This work also has given  the comparison between articles in International and Indonesia institution  2. Systematic Literature Review  The survey has been conducted to review the literature based on article in trends for predictive  maintenance  on  aircraft  using  machine  learning.  Increasing  of  interest  on  research  for  this  area  is 

International Journal of Aviation Science and Engineering 39  e-ISSN: 2715-6958                 p-ISSN: 2721-5342    Volume 3, Issue 1, June 2021, page 37-44 doi: 10.47355/AVIA.$V3$$$I1$$.45  important due to growth of knowledge and for industry. This survey's scope period 5 years between  2016 until 2021. To accomplish the purpose of this study, various of journal articles and conferences  from maintenance strategy focused on Predictive Maintenance on aircraft engine to implemented on  machine learning methods. The literature searching is used Google Scholar as primary sources and  other such as IEEE Xplore for international articles, for Indonesia articles, literature searching used  GARUDA and SINTA. Keyword for searching the article used:  1. "Predictive Maintenance".  2. "Predictive Maintenance on Aircraft".  3. "Predictive Maintenance using Machine Learning".  4. "Predictive Maintenance on Aircraft using Machine Learning".         The keywords are representative of this study to find out the current trends and challenges in  this area of the research. Selection for this survey literature focused on the suitable method of machine  learning  to  make  prediction,  the  methods  using  based  on  the  experiment  and  calculation  and  comparison from various methods. This survey also selected article journal on September 2021.  As systematical review from journal articles,  the  result of the  searching  was categorized from  years between 2016 until 2021. The years of publication indicate the interesting of researcher about  this topic is increase or decrease each year. This work survey aims to compare the origin of the journal  publication based on institution that publish this topic (International or Indonesia), this comparison  the interest of local researcher and trends. The categorization also compared different methods that  using for predictive maintenance and machine learning for aircraft engine.  3. Recent Trends of Predictive Maintenance  The total research for literature survey was 35 articles and filtered from above criteria being 19  articles  from  International  and  from  3  Indonesia.  The  selection  process  is  focusing  on  keywords  mentioned before, and applying ML into PdM method in aviation industry or other industry.   In optimal way to applied predictive maintenance in any system, ML method which included  DL  is  the  best  for  make  prediction  with  high  accuracy  result.  After  applied  the  filter  in  literature  searching  that  matched  with  criteria  that  have  made,  the  summary  articles  which  divided  in  International and Indonesia group articles shows on table 1 and table 2. the year of publish the article  shows  in figure  1  that  indicate  the  ML  applied  on  PdM  is  new  trend  of  work,  because  average  of  publishing article  per  year is only 3,7 articles  from 2016-2021, and Indonesia institution in recent 1  year  which is 2020 and 2021 published articles  about it.  Most of classify  technique  of ML using on  articles  while  implemented  it  on  PdM  because  of  this  method  has  high  accuracy  than  regression  technique.    Figure 1. Number of articles in years  0 4 7 2 6 3 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 201620172018201920202021

International Journal of Aviation Science and Engineering 40  e-ISSN: 2715-6958                 p-ISSN: 2721-5342    Volume 3, Issue 1, June 2021, page 37-44 doi: 10.47355/AVIA.$V3$$$I1$$.45  RF is the most method used in literature systematic review, there 6 articles used it. LSTM method  for  prediction is frequently used in recent years  (2019-2021) because of this  method output is high  accuracy and reliable to any cases in industry, especially on aviation. In international articles group,  6  articles  research  about  applied  of  ML  in  PdM  for  aircraft  engine,  and  2  articles  applied  PdM  on  aircraft engine without ML method, and the rest of articles employed PdM and ML on other industry  such  as  power  plant,  manufacture,  and  cooling  system.  In  Indonesia  institution,  there  is  no article  applied PdM on aviation industry had published until now which fulfil the criteria was made in this  work, the most articles focus on manufacturing industry, and the methods used are linier regression,  Random Forest (RF), and Support Vector Machine (SVM). This described in Indonesia the enthusiasm of  PdM using ML is in low level, especially on aircraft engine or aviation industry.    Table 1. Summary of Recent Trends Predictive Maintenance International Research 

## References

 Year Methods Description of Applied Predictive Maintenance  Hsu, et al [9] 2020  RF; DT;  K-means fold  Statistical process to detect fault and ML predict maintenance  needs on wind turbine which accuracy higher 90% could  detect wind turbine failure state.  Amruthnath and    Gupta [10]  2018  Principal Component  Analysis (PCA);  Gaussian Mixture  Modelling (GMM);  C-means; K-means  Cluster Analysis  Monitoring the exhaust fan using vibrator sensor and divided  to 3 are healthy warning, and fault condition using PCA and  Cluster Analysis then predict the condition using ML,  afterward T 2  method is high accuracy then other.  Bampoula, et al. [3] 2021  Long Short-Term  Memory (LSTM);  Autoencoder  LSTM-autoencoder employed to estimate RUL on rolling  milling machine in high accuracy, but it has limitation on  applied multiple neural networks to identify status RUL.  Bruneo and Vita [11] 2019  LSTM and   Tunning  hyperparameter  Using LSTM and tunning hyperparameter for Predictive  Maintenance on jet engine which higher RMSE than other ML  methods.  Cho et al. [12] 2018  Hybrid ML  unsupervised and semi  supervised  Smart factory with various machine operation without proper  maintenance data solved the issues using hybrid machine  learning calculate predictive maintenance.  Demidova [13] 2020  LSTM; GRU; RNN  Hybrid (LSTM and  GRU)  Employed one and two layers RNN, LSTM, and GRU neurons  for calculate RUL for predictive maintenance on aircraft  engine and accuracy above 90% using LSTM and GRU.  Hermawan, et al. [14] 2020 RF  Combined of predictive maintenance and monitoring applied  on real industry 4.0 using ML with 95% overall accuracy  Gohel, et al [15] 2020  Support Vector Machine  (SVM); Logistic  Regression  Nuclear infrastructure is vital site and applied ML to make  Predictive maintenance, because using SVM and LR have  complete functionality for nuclear power plan infrastructure.       Chen, et al [16] 2020  Autoencoder; Cox  Proportional Hazard  (CPH); LSTM  Using PdM to calculate TBF using CPH and LSTM based on  historical maintenance data on automobile. 

International Journal of Aviation Science and Engineering 41  e-ISSN: 2715-6958                 p-ISSN: 2721-5342    Volume 3, Issue 1, June 2021, page 37-44 doi: 10.47355/AVIA.$V3$$$I1$$.45  Kanawaday and  Sane [17]  2017  Auto-Regressive  Integrated Moving  Average (ARIMA)  Employed ARIMA to forecast possible failure and quality  defects from time series Slitting machine data on various  sensors.   Ullah, et al. [18] 2017  Artificial Neural  Network (ANN);  Multilayer  Infrared thermal image used as monitoring electrical  equipment, then applied ANN to classify the state of thermal  condition from electrical equipment as predictive  maintenance.   Butte, at al. [19] 2018  RF; Gradient Boosting  Method (GBM)  Deep Learning  Predictive maintenance employed on microelectronic  manufacturing to solve issues of unplanned maintenance using  various of ML  Xayyasith, et al [20] 2018  Decision Tree (DT);  SVM; Discriminant  Analysis (DA); Logistic  Regression; KNN  ML applied to predictive maintenance on cooling system for  hydraulic power plan which data collected from temperature  sensor and historical maintenance.    The result is SVM and  DT better to make prediction other than ML methods using in  this work.  Korvesis, et al. [21] 2018  Multiple instance  Regression (MIR)  Developing alert system for upcoming failure on aviation as  predictive maintenance using Multiple Instance Regression,  and collected data from post flight report.  Urbano, et al. [22] 2018  Generalized Like-hood  Ratio Test (GLRT)  Employed Predictive maintenance to detection and diagnose  limit cycle oscillation on civil aircraft using GLRT method.   Behera, et al [23] 2019 GBT; RF  Applied ensemble tree ML method which is GBT and RF to  estimate current health and RUL of turbofan engines in  predictive maintenance. Both methods gain above 90%  accuracy, and GBT more accurate than RF.   Mathew, et al [24] 2017  Liner Regression; DT  SVM; RF; K-Nearest  Neighbors (KNN);  GBM; Deep Learning;  Analysis of Variance  (ANOVA); K-means  Comparing 10 different ML methods to calculate RUL for  predictive maintenance of turbofan engine as result RF is  lowest RMSE than other methods  Dangut, et al [25] 2020  Natural Language  Processing (NLP); RF  Using hybrid ML by combined NLP and ensemble learning to  solve irregular data pattern for calculate predictive  maintenance which performed better than only ensemble  methods, and this method 10% outperformed than synthetic  minority oversampling technique   Panagiotis, et al [26] 2020  CNN; LSTM  CNN and LSTM  Combined CNN and LSTM applied to predict maintenance  which is calculating RUL from historical data. The accuracy  of combined method reaching above 99%.     

International Journal of Aviation Science and Engineering 42  e-ISSN: 2715-6958                 p-ISSN: 2721-5342    Volume 3, Issue 1, June 2021, page 37-44 doi: 10.47355/AVIA.$V3$$$I1$$.45  Table 2. Summary of Recent Trends Predictive Maintenance Indonesia Research 

## References

 Year Methods Description of Applied Predictive Maintenance  Suryadarma and Ai [27] 2020 Linier Regression  Predicting cooling system maintenance using linier regression  which SCADA system collected real-time data from  combination sensors  Andriani, et al.   [28]  2021 RF and SVM  Labeling data which is providing by manufacture is costly  task, but ML can solve this problem and the calculate the  prediction, RF and SVM implemented to this action to forecast  predictive maintenance.     Kusumaningrum, et al.   [29]  2021 RF and SVM  Predicting RUL based on multi-sensors data and machine  failure report ML can calculate the pattern and make  prediction. With tunning optimal in Rf and SVM to apply  predictive maintenance.   4. Potential Methods and Challenges for PdM on Aircraft Engines  As result of systematic literature review about implemented PdM on aircraft engines using ML,  there are several methods of ML most frequent used: RF and LSTM. Both methods (RF and LSTM)  can apply on regression and classify technique that the reasons why this method well known for most  researcher  to  predicting.  As  aims  of  this  work,  implemented  PdM  on  aircraft  engine  using  ML  method has potential to developing in few  sectors such as combined proper method to create new  method  with  high  prediction  accuracy,  or  make  the  variable  on  the  data  effective  in  tunning  hyperparameter.  LSTM and GRU selected as the optimal and effective method to implemented PdM because both  of method result high accuracy and minimum RMSE data. LSTM and GRU are the RNN base method  appealing to the PdM domain due to the fact that both method excellent at learning from sequences,  and it will allow the method to use time-series data that operating in longer period of time in past or  historical data to detect failure patterns. As the advantages of LSTM and GRU, they have limitation  that  cannot  deal  with  irregular  time-series  data,  but  to  apply  on  PdM  for  aircraft  engine  is  the  advantage for both methods, because in the aviation industry the record data in regular form on time- series.  Hermawan, et. al. [14] on they work to calculate PdM using DL which is CLSTM (combination  CNN and LSTM) have got accuracy rate more than 99%, but in this article only mentioned their result  on accuracy rate, which the other evaluation result they cannot display such as precision, recall, and  error percentage. On other hand, others have worked on RNN method which are GRU, LSTM, and  combination  both  method  resulting  the  LSTM  and  GRU  demonstrate  their  high  efficiency  to  solve  classification problem for PdM on aircraft engine. Recent article also using machine learning system  optimization of the algorithm for predictive maintenance [29].  In additional, the development of PdM strategy in any industry which employed ML we briefly  can mention that it will change our future to more efficient in every sector. Moreover, in Indonesia,  shows an opportunity to develop the PdM using ML method, especially on aircraft engine sector due  to the high efficiency and accuracy rate of LSTM and GRU method [28-29].  There  are some possibilities for  the  future  work,  they  are  including the  combination  of  ML  method with itself or other method, tunning hyperparameter to optimize the computation process,  and  implemented  the  result  and  calculation  (Training  and  Test)  on  real-data  as  premier  source,  because most of research conducted to artificial data.  

International Journal of Aviation Science and Engineering 43  e-ISSN: 2715-6958                 p-ISSN: 2721-5342    Volume 3, Issue 1, June 2021, page 37-44 doi: 10.47355/AVIA.$V3$$$I1$$.45  5. Conclusions  The study of systematic literature review focused on PdM using ML method for aircraft engine  is resulting PdM using ML is rather new topic which show the average publish article only 3,7 articles  per year that fulfil our criteria. LSTM and GRU are the best for now to calculate PdM, especially on  aircraft  engine  which  the  accuracy  more  than  99%.  The  interesting  of  this  topic  is  low  level  in  Indonesia,  because  there  are  only  3  articles  published  focusing  on  PdM  using  ML  which  fulfil  our  criteria,  and  there  is  no  article  focus  on  aircraft  engine.  Combination  other  ML  method,  tunning  parameter,  and  using  real-data  is  the  future  possible  study  that  can  be  applied  on  ML method  for  PdM.      

## References

  1. Bloch, H. P. (2017). Petrochemical Machinery Insights. Butterworth-Heinemann. pp.191-222.   2. Susto,  G.  A.,  Member,  S.,  Beghi,  A.,  &  Luca,  C.  D.  (2012).  A  predictive  maintenance  system  for  epitaxy  processes   based   on   filtering   and   prediction   techniques.   IEEE   Transactions   on   Semiconductor  Manufacturing, 25, pp.638–649.   3. Bampoula, X., et  al.  (2021).  A  Deep  Learning  Model  for  Predictive  Maintenance  in  Cyber-Physical  Production Systems Using LSTM Autoencoders. Sensors 21, no. 3. pp. 972.  4. Wuest,  T.,  Weimer,  D.,  Irgens,  C., and Thoben,  K.D.  (2016).  Machine  learning  in  manufacturing:  Advantages, challenges, and applications. Production & Manufacturing Research, 4, pp.23–45   5. Si, X., Wang, W., Hu, C. H., and Zhou, D. (2011). Remaining useful life estimation - a review on the statistical  data driven approaches. European Journal of Operational Research. vol. 213, pp. 1–14.  6. Ran, Y.  (2019).  A  survey  of  predictive  maintenance:  Systems,  purposes  and  approaches.  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:1912.07383.  7. Carvalho, T. P.,  et  al.  (2019).  A  systematic  literature  review  of  machine  learning  methods  applied  to  predictive maintenance. Computers & Industrial Engineering. pp. 137.   8. Khan, K.,  et  al.  (2021).  Recent  trends  and  challenges  in  predictive  maintenance  of  aircraft’s engine and  hydraulic system. Journal of the Brazilian Society of Mechanical Sciences and Engineering 43, no. 8. pp. 1- 17.  9. Hsu, J-Y., et al. (2020). Wind turbine fault diagnosis and predictive maintenance through statistical process  control and machine learning. IEEE Access 8. pp. 23427-23439.  10. Amruthnath, N., and Gupta, T. (2018). A research study on unsupervised machine learning algorithms for  early  fault  detection  in  predictive  maintenance.  In  2018  5th  International  Conference  on  Industrial  Engineering and Applications (ICIEA). pp. 355-361.  11. Bruneo, D., and Vita,  F.  D. (2019).  On  the  use  of  LSTM  networks  for  predictive  maintenance  in  smart  industries." In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Smart Computing (SMARTCOMP). pp. 241-248.  12. Cho, S., et al. (2018). A hybrid machine learning approach for predictive maintenance in smart factories of  the future. In IFIP International Conference on Advances in Production Management Systems. pp. 311-317.  13. Demidova,  L.  A.  (2020).  Re-current  neural  networks’ configurations  in  the  predictive  maintenance  problems. In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, vol. 714, no. 1. pp. 012005.  14. Hermawan, A. P., Kim, D-S., and Lee, M-J. (2020). Predictive Maintenance of Aircraft Engine using Deep  Learning Technique.  In  2020  International  Conference  on  Information  and  Communication  Technology  Convergence (ICTC), pp. 1296-1298.  15. Gohel, H. A., et al. (2020. Predictive maintenance architecture development for nuclear infrastructure using  machine learning. Nuclear Engineering and Technology 52, no. 7. pp.1436-1442.  16. Chen, C.,  et  al.  (2020).  Predictive  maintenance  using  cox  proportional  hazard  deep  learning.  Advanced  Engineering Informatics 44.   17. Kanawaday, A., and Sane, A. (2017). Machine learning for predictive maintenance of industrial machines  using  IoT  sensor  data.  In  2017  8th  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Software  Engineering  and  Service  Science (ICSESS). pp. 87-90. 

International Journal of Aviation Science and Engineering 44  e-ISSN: 2715-6958                 p-ISSN: 2721-5342    Volume 3, Issue 1, June 2021, page 37-44 doi: 10.47355/AVIA.$V3$$$I1$$.45  18. Ullah, I., et al. (2017). Predictive maintenance of power substation equipment by infrared thermography  using a machine-learning approach. Energies 10, no. 12. pp. 1987.  19. Butte, S., Prashanth, A. R., and Patil, S. (2018). Machine learning based predictive maintenance strategy: a  super  learning  approach  with  deep  neural  networks.  In  2018  IEEE  Workshop  on  Microelectronics  and  Electron Devices (WMED). pp. 1-5.   20. Xayyasith, S.,  Promwungkwa, A., and  Ngamsanroaj,  K.  (2018).  Application  of  machine  learning  for  predictive  maintenance  cooling  system  in  Nam  Ngum-1  hydropower  plant.  In  2018  16th  international  conference on ICT and knowledge engineering (ICT&KE). pp. 1-5.  21. Korvesis, P., Besseau, S., and Vazirgiannis, M. (2018). Predictive maintenance in aviation: Failure prediction  from post-flight reports. In 2018 IEEE 34th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), pp. 1414- 1422.  22. Urbano, S., Chaumette, E., Goupil, P., and Tourneret. J. Y. (2018). Aircraft vibration detection and diagnosis  for predictive maintenance using a GLR Test. IFAC-Papers on Line 51, no. 24. pp. 1030-1036.  23. Behera, S., et  al.  (2019).  Ensemble  trees  learning  based  improved  predictive  maintenance  using  IIoT  for  turbofan engines. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing, pp. 842- 850.  24. Mathew, V., et al. (2017). Prediction of Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) of turbofan engine using machine  learning. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Circuits and Systems (ICCS), pp. 306-311.   25. Dangut, M.  D,  Zakwan  S.,  and  Jennions,  I.  K. (2021).  An  integrated  machine  learning  model  for  aircraft  components rare failure prognostics with log-based dataset. ISA transactions.113. pp.127-139.  26. Panagiotis,  K.,  Besseau,  S.  and  Vazirgiannis,  M.  (2018).  Predictive  maintenance  in  aviation:  Failure  prediction  from  post-flight  reports.  In  2018  IEEE  34th  International  Conference  on  Data  Engineering  (ICDE), pp. 1414-1422.  27. Suryadarma,  E.  H.  E., and Ai,  T.  J.  (2020).  Predictive  Maintenance  of  Cooling  System  with  Sensor  Combination and SCADA 10th ICOSCM.  28. Andriani, A. Z.,  Kurniati,  N., and Santosa,  B.  (2021).  Enabling Predictive  Maintenance  Using  Machine  Learning  in  Industrial  Machines  with  Sensor  Data.  Proceedings  of  the  International  Conference  on  Industrial Engineering and Operations Management.  29. Kusumaningrum, D.,  Nani, K.,  and Santosa,  B.  (2021).  Machine  Learning  for  Predictive  Maintenance.  Proceedings  of  the  International  Conference  on  Industrial  Engineering  and  Operations  Management.  IEOM Society International, pp. 2348-2356.              This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons  Attribution  4.0  International License,  which  permits  unrestricted  use,  distribution,  and reproduction in any medium provided the original work is properly cited.    